Choices and Encodings, Final Project,  Ursula and Veronica

There are a few key choices that were made in this visualization. The first was to make it a guided vis. The narrative guides the user through the visualization, but the user has a chance to interact and explore at several stages. I chose this format because I believed it best fit the story she was trying to tell. First we need to provide the user with some background information and then we can allow them to explore the data. I liked the scrolly format because it conveys the passage of time and also mimics someone moving down a path. This is a nice mirror to the path of European Jews we are following.

Veronica wanted to add a map because she thought it added good context as well as an interesting point of comparison. Though concentration camps are spread across Europe, extermination camps are all clumped together in Poland. This is an important thing to know because later on it explains why Poland lost 90% of the Jewish population but France only lost 25%. We chose to use the same color in the bar chart as in the map for visual consistency.

The next choice was to use quantity and area to convey percentages of the total and number of deaths. When thinking about how I wanted to communicate information about the deaths of the Holocaust, one of the first things I wanted to convey was just how many people died. I don't think bar charts do the death total justice because it's difficult to see the relationship to the total. It's also difficult to visualize 6 million people, so I wanted to break that number down into smaller components that were easier to understand. I chose 10,000 because it's a round number and also because it's the population of the town I grew up in. I know what a community of 10,000 people looks like; I personally feel the loss of that dot on the graph.

Next, the different modes of exploring deaths. Going off of what I learned in my Holocaust class, I think some of the most interesting breakdowns of the death total come from exploring demographics and total deaths in death location and by each method. Though these numbers are approximations, I think it's important to understand that vulnerable populations comprise about half of the death toll in the Holocaust. Color was a good encoding here because it's the most powerful visually. Contrast with the grey helps the selected dots stand out against the others. 

Finally, moving the dots down in the final two dot graphs. This is how I chose to communicate relative scale. For example, if I tell you 1.3 million Jews were shot by german troops in the german invasion of Russia, you can figure out that's just over 1/6 of all the deaths in the Holocaust. But when you see how many dots there are in that category compared to the others, you understand how massive a loss that was. More Jews died from that invasion alone than in Auschwitz, even though we think of Auschwitz as the center of Jewish loss in the Holocaust. By the time the user has selected all the dots, the physical separation of the dots on the page mirrors the separation of the Jewish population in real life.

I originally was going to visualize maternal mortality data, but I was compelled by a reading I did for my Holocaust class to switch to visualizing this. The reading discussed the aftermath of the Holocaust and the importance of record keeping and memorialization as the number of first hand witnesses continues to dwindle. I was talking about the reading with a friend of mine who is the granddaughter of two Holocaust survivors, one of whom was in Auschwitz for two years. She says that the world has a responsibility to keep their stories alive and to remember what happened to them. As the descendent of Polish and Russian Jews who were not so lucky, I cannot help but feel the same.

Ursula Alwang
